---
layout: post
title: "Why I'm Trying Literate Programming"
description: ""
category: 
tags: [literate programming, emacs]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

I decided to experiment with literate programming recently because I
felt like something must be wrong with this story: A colleague and I
began a research project using MATLAB for a class.  We both started
with about the same amount of MATLAB experience: close to nil.  We
both started at the ground floor of development.  There was no legacy
code to speak of, and again there was only two of us.  We spec'd out
most of the simulation as a LaTeX document that clearly described the
simulation mathematically based on a reference implementation.  In my
mind, there isn't a better scenario for collaboration. However, late
into the project, my colleague was getting shut out of participating
in development.  What shut my colleague out?

Let me be clear, my colleague was willing, smart, and hard-working.
Just the kind of person one hopes to be working with, yet the project
had grown into a labyrinth that only I knew how to navigate.  Without
me on hand to help navigate the growing code base, his efforts seemed
stymied.  I will be the first to admit that the code, and in
particular my code, was not stellar---it was written to meet a
deadline and both of us were green when it came to MATLAB.  However,
this wasn't a large project, but it did grow rapidly.  Below is a
graph of the total commits as shown in github.  (The repository I'm
showing is not public unfortunately.)  

<img src="{{site.url}}/assets/images/commits-graph.png"/>

My expectation was that having two people developing one code base
from the beginning with equivalent experience should be a recipe for
success.  That did not turn out to be the case.  Although the project
did not fail outright, we ran our experiments, produced results,
and should ultimately get a publication out of it.  However, judging
it on the basis of enabling collaboration, it was a failure with what
are some of the best starting conditions possible.  Just think how
much worse a project will fare when one's working on a code base with
_n_ contributors; each contributor joining at a different time with a
differing amount of experience with the language, domain, and tools;
and on a code base with a longer history and its own legacy issues?
One glimmer of how things could be different was provided by the spec
we wrote before beginning the implementation.  

We had written up a spec that described the dynamics of the simulation
as mathematical relationships.  Everything we wanted the simulation to
do was clear and easily inspectable.  As we wrote the implementation,
however, what was clear became obscure.  "What does this section of
code do?"  If one compared the code with the spec and squinted one
could start to piece together how the implementation fulfilled the
spec.  But this connection was fleeting.  One had to compare between
the spec and the code, make the connection, then enjoy the
enlightenment before forgetting it.  As the code base became the ground
truth going beyond the spec, the utility of the spec was crippled,
e.g., "Was the spec updated since we decided to do Y instead of X?"
Of course it hasn't.  I've been too busy implementing Y.

In fact the spec ended up being a kind of reverse-engineered literate
program.  We used a reference implementation to draw out the details
of what the original simulation was actually doing.  In it, we had
sections of code that we decoded into mathematical relationships.  It
is kind of amazing how much some code can be compressed when
describing it mathematically.  We could examine the code and math
directly, changing that connection from fleeting into something
lasting.  Given this reverse-engineered literate program, we then
_enthusiastically_ went and re-encoded the math into code again and
lost that connection and scrutability.

All I've said about literate programming so far is that it had math
and code in one document.  I think of literate programming as
inverting the relationship between comments and code.  In normal
programming, comments are superfluous, thrown out, and don't matter to
the compiler.  The code comes first and foremost and if you're lucky,
maybe there are some comments to lead you astray.  In a literate
program, one begins by writing a document for someone to read.  Within
the document, one specifies sections of code in whatever order he or
she feel is best for the reader.  Here is an [example literate
program]({{site.url}}/assets/images/hello-emacsy-paper.pdf) and its
[literate source
code]({{site.url}}/assets/images/hello-emacsy.nw.txt); it uses
the literate programming tool [noweb](http://www.cs.tufts.edu/~nr/noweb/).
I wrote those for the Emacsy project which I proposed as [a Google Summer of
Code
project](https://google-melange.appspot.com/gsoc/proposal/review/google/gsoc2013/shanecelis/1).


An experiment that I would love to have tried is to take that spec,
chuck out the reference implementation sections of code, and write the
implementation as a truly literate program.  I didn't have enough
experience with literate programming at the time to think of it, but
even today the thought of encouraging someone to collaborate on a
literate program seems like a hard sell, e.g., "Do you like to code?
Great. Do you like to write? Awesome. Do you like math? No. Well, two out of
three is WAY better than average."  But I am finding a lot of
advantages to literate programming.

Advantages
----------

**A picture is worth a thousand ASCII pictures.** A big advantage of
literate programming is being able to include graphics.  I had a
problem recently where I was implementing a simple 2D ray cast.  I
sketched it out on [Paper 53](http://www.fiftythree.com/paper),
labeled my variables, then baked that drawing right into the document.
Usually, that connection---What does this code actually mean?  What
does it represent?---would have been fleeting.  I would have made a
sketch on graph paper, written the code, inevitably lost or trashed
the sketch.  Suppose I find a bug in my code months later.  How am I
going to figure it out?  Well, I'll probably try to reverse-engineer
my sketch.  Why do I do this to myself and everyone that has to
maintain this code after me!?  With literate programming I made that
connection of what does this code mean into something lasting, and
it's not in a separate document that will be forgotten, unloved, and
superseded because it's the ground truth: _it's the source of the
source_.

![A picture is worth a thousand ASCII pictures.]({{site.url}}/assets/images/vision-page-2.png "A picture is worth a thousand ASCII pictures.")

**You can read it like a book.** Another thing I didn't appreciate
initially is that a literate program provides an unambiguous place to
start with an unfamiliar code base and a direction to go.  Literate
programming linearizes a code base.  More than that it linearizes the
code to be understandable---not compilable.  Imagine if books weren't
arranged in a linear fashion.  Instead of starting at page one, expert
readers suggest, "I like to start on page 34 work backwards, then jump
to page 62."  Normally when I've decided I want to alter an existing
code base, first I have to acquaint myself with it. I dive into
whatever looks most promising: README, HACKING, main.c, or project.h.
I look at those by convention, but the meat of the project that I want
to alter could be anywhere in that file tree, and it may not be
documented at all. I search, grep, and basically bumble around until I
find the spots I need to edit. A literate program is a [topological
ordering](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Topological_sorting) of that
file tree, ordered to make it easier to understand.

![topological order]({{site.url}}/assets/images/topo-order.png)

**The comfort of plaintext, the richness of PDF.** It is kind of
amazing how low-tech coding is.  If it's not plaintext, then it will
get corrupted and destroy your weekend.  This is partly why I can't
take fully to Mathematica, which does allow for a rich, graphical
programming and documentation language.  Plaintext is comforting.  In
a world of inscrutable binary formats, plaintext stands out as being
readily inspectable, wholly knowable, effortlessly editable.  Most of
the literate programming tools use LaTeX as their documentation
language because Knuth, who started it all, did.  And it is comforting
that my documentation and code is in plaintext, can be checked in to
git and diff'd, but that doesn't prevent me from using a richer medium
to better describe what my program does, should do, and can inspire
others to do.

Disadvantages
-------------

**LaTeX raises the barrier to entry.** If a literate program has a
mathematical bent, then using LaTeX as the documentation language is a
blessing.  But LaTeX is a tricky tool and it raises the barrier to
entry considerably for would-be collaborators.  If I wanted to write a
literate program that was not math heavy, I'd prefer using Markdown as
the documentation language.  The first literate program tool was
[WEB](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WEB), and it dictated the
programming language, a dialect of pascal, and the documentation
language, LaTeX.  Many tools that followed were programming language
neutral, but the documentation language has not been allowed the same
freedom.  I think the programmer should be able to select both
languages.  The [Docco](http://jashkenas.github.io/docco/) project
uses plain old Markdown as its documentation language.  Its simplicity
is inspiring.  The downsides are that one may not reorder code to ease
its explanation; the code must be in the order the compiler expects;
and its one code file per Markdown file.

**Tool support is lacking.** Literate programming is not mainstream, so
the tool support is sometimes lacking.  For instance, `#line` compiler
directives are a necessity.  If compiler errors direct you to the
generated source code rather than the literate code, forget every
mildly good thing you've ever heard about literate programming; you've
entered hell. I've been writing a lot of code in [GNU Guile
Scheme](http://www.gnu.org/software/guile/) and I needed `#line`
directives, which seems imminently doable using reader macros.
However, it actually did require me to patch Guile in order to do it
in the general case.  I will write up another post and share that
patch soon.  

There are some other disadvantages:

* **It takes more time.** Literate programming does take more time than
       just slapping some code together.

* **Multiple modes in Emacs, ha!** I use Emacs, and Emacs does many
    wonderful things, but multiple modes is not one of them.  In a
    noweb file, multiple syntaxes are nested together and the Emacs
    regex-based syntax highlighter and mode detector are not good
    enough.  I wish Emacs used [Parsing Expression
    Grammars (PEGs).](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parsing_expression_grammar)

* **Writing raises the barrier to entry.** Knuth asks us to not only
    write good code but also to write well, and neither of these are
    easy tasks.  Asking for both from every contributor is a tall
    order.

Conclusion
----------

I'm not suggesting that literate programming is a silver bullet or the
best way to write every program.  I don't use it for everything.  I'm
only using it on programs that I want to encourage collaboration on.
My hope is that it will help me avoid the story I outlined at the
beginning where collaborators are shut out of participating because
the edifice one builds becomes an inscrutable labyrinth; however,
literate programming may be a double-edged sword due to it raising the
barrier to entry.  I haven't gotten the chance to see whether literate
programming helps or hurts a project.  My current projects are solo so
far, but I am enjoying trying to program literately.  There is a
grandeur in this kind of programming.

