---
layout: post
title: "The Fall of Man was Positively Humane: A Naturalist's Interpretation of The Fall"
description: ""
category: 
tags: [comic, bible, blasphemy]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

I made [a geeky comic](/2013/06/15/the-garden/) that trades off the
story of The Garden of Eden and the Fall of Man.  I do not endeavor to
explain that comic here, but it is apparent that the interpretation of
the Fall of Man is colored in such a negative light that I feel I must
present my own positive interpretation.

* * *

The creation story described in Genesis is often used by Biblical
Fundamentalists to dismiss an alternative story of humanity's origins
that has emerged from the sciences.  Fundamentalists insist that a
literal interpretation is the only legitimate interpretation of the
Bible. It's as though they are committed to the idea that, "God can do
all things---except use a metaphor."  Genesis, and The Fall
specifically, is done a disservice by these Fundamentalists because
The Fall has a beautiful interpretation seen through the lens of
science, which speaks well of it. What is a naturalist's
interpretation of Genesis?  It is not a story that details Man's fall
from grace; it is a narrative for Man's ascent from merely animals to
moral animals.

This essay does not imply that the interpretation given here was
necessarily intended by the original authors of Genesis.  One might
ask, why consider the interpretation if the authors did not originally
intend it?  Because texts are mirrors in that they often reveal more
about the reader than the original author, and often profitably so.
Consider the Declaration of Independence.  Its meaning is more
beautiful today than when it was written because it had the capacity
to grow beyond the constraints of its time.  Americans read and revere
"all men are created equal" in an inclusive sense, not of applying
exclusively to white males.  It is no injustice that American culture
and language have grown beyond what Thomas Jefferson and the Second
Continental Congress had intended.  It is in this sense of working
with a living document that this essay will treat The Fall.

<img class="right" src="/assets/images/genesis/serpent-small.jpg">

The event that this essay focuses on is foreshadowed by this passage.

>"But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not
>eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely
>die" (King James Version, Gen. 2.17).

Of course, Adam and Eve do eat from the Tree of Knowledge.  It is the
consequences of that action that propels this naturalistic
interpretation.  Let us address some cherry-picked consequences in
turn. 

## Child Birth 

God punishes women with difficult child birth.  

> "Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy
> conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children" (Gen. 3.16).

Interpreting this from a biological perspective, the capacity to
acquire knowledge relates to human brain size.  Human brains increased
in size dramatically compared with their closest evolutionary kin,
their skulls increasing in size too.  The most obvious obstacle to
ever increasing brain and skull size for a baby is its mother's
pelvis.  For a quadrupedal animal, this might be an easier burden to
bear, but human pelvises had only recently been shaped for bipedalism,
an awkward arrangement to deliver big-headed babies.  This made child
birth more difficult for women.  Big skulls may account for the
suffering that women undergo during child birth.  Difficult child
birth is a consequence of big-brained babies, and big brains are a
prerequisite for general knowledge.

## Death

<img class="right" src="/assets/images/genesis/death-small.jpg">

God punishes both man and woman for their disobedience with death.

> "In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return unto
>  the ground; ... for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return"
>  (Gen. 3.19).  

Traditionally, this is interpeted as an entirely bad outcome. However,
consider what death is to an animal of limited faculties.  Without
foresight, does death rightly exist?  Animals die certainly, but what
is to say that death exists from an animal's perspective?  From the
animal's perspective death may not exist at all.  Animals may feel
fear and vigorously avoid things that lead to death, but that does not
mean they comprehend it anymore than they understand that sex leads to
offspring.  They do it because it works; understanding is not
necessary.  Death only becomes appreciable in a creature with
foresight.  If knowledge grants one insights into what the future
holds, then one must come to grips with their own mortality and death.
Death is a necessary consequence of knowledge and foresight, not an
incidental punishment.

## Paradise Lost

<img class="right" src="/assets/images/genesis/expulsion-small.jpg">

The breaking of God's commandment is seen as Man's Fall from Grace.
Traditionally, it has a very negative connotation: Man brought sin
into the world.  Man was cast out of the Garden of Eden, a paradise on
Earth.  Consider it instead as the introduction of morality into the
world---including both sin and virtue.  Prior to that, there were only
animals.  Animals are not moral agents.  Animals kill one another and
even humans, but we do not call them murderers.  Their actions are
amoral.  Genesis introduces an agent that makes a transition from an
amoral world to a moral one.  Prior to eating from the Tree of
Knowledge, Adam and Eve were amoral.  They could not divine right from
wrong, so they could not have rightly understood disobeying God was
wrong.  In that sense their transition from amoral to moral cannot be
wrong---that would mischaracterize the act as a moral act; it would be
like calling a lion a murderer for killing a gazelle.  Man does not
introduce sin alone into the world; Man introduces morality into the
world which includes both sin and virtue.

## Humanity Gained

The traditional interpretation of the Fall has not let the preceding
point go unnoticed since Eve is blamed more so than Adam.  For if Eve
could not tell right from wrong prior to eating from the Tree of
Knowledge, she could certainly tell afterward.  Thus, by Eve offering
Adam fruit from the Tree of Knowledge, she knowingly abetted Adam's
disobedience of God's commandment.  However, consider again what it
would mean for Eve to leave Adam as an amoral animal.  The Garden of
Eden is not a paradise hidden away from humanity; the amoral animal
kingdom is the ever present Garden of Eden, but one we are forbidden
from entering lest we become animals once more.  One could recreate
the Garden of Eden on any remote island.  One need only release a
human child with no language, no knowledge, no companionship, but
plenty of food---but such an act would be monstrous.  If one happened
upon a child placed in such a condition who grew to be a man, would it
not also be monstrous to leave them in that state?  Eve apparently
thought so.  Morality forces one to wrestle with more than just the
will to obey; it forces one to discern good and evil to the best of
one's ability and challenges one to act accordingly.

## The Tree of Life

There are two trees named in the Garden of Eden.  Each tree can be
tied directly to a scientific idea.  The Tree of Life is introduced in
Genesis as God dealt with Man's trespass.  

> "And the Lord God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to
> know good and evil; and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take
> also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever" (Gen. 3.22).

Four and half billion years ago, the Earth was radically altered by
the introduction of something new---a replicator, a gene.  Perhaps it
was a primitive RNA.  That replicator evolved and eventually spawned
all the diversity of life.  Darwin envisioned life as a tree with its
descendants branching away from the root.  Are genes the Tree of Life
from Genesis?  Genes do seem to hold the secrets to life and death.
If one understood genes completely such that he or she could reshape
them, could death be eradicated?  Possibly.  Researchers like Aubrey
de Grey insist this is a viable idea (Hooper 1).  

<img class="right" src="/assets/images/genesis/flaming-sword-small.jpg">

>"So he \[God\] drove out the man; and he placed at the east of the
>garden of Eden Cherubims, and a flaming sword which turned every way,
>to keep the way of the tree of life" (Gen. 3.24).

If it is only our ignorance of genes that prohibits us from picking
the fruits of the Tree of Life, then the staggering complexity of our
genes becomes the protector of the Tree of Life.

## The Tree of Knowledge

The Tree of Knowledge of good and evil that Adam and Eve ate from also
has its own scientific representative.  With the introduction of
humans on Earth, a new replicator has been released and it too is
producing radical effects---the meme.  It is crudely analogous to a
gene as the cultural unit of selection.  Instead of memes trying to
replicate themselves in bodies as genes do, memes replicate themselves
in brains (Blackmore 37).  A catchy tune that is hard to get out of
one's head, that is a meme.  A chain letter that orders one to
replicate it for dubious rewards; it is a meme.  The ten commandments,
those are memes.  What is not a meme?  An experience is not a meme.
An idea that is never communicated is not a meme.  In the same way
that the Tree of Life fans out with variation and is trimmed by
natural selection, memes branch out with great variety, dying out
essentially when no minds or artifacts serve as their hosts.  This
tree of ideas, of memes, is the Tree of Knowledge not only of good and
evil but of all human knowledge.

## Conclusion

Genesis is an ancient story.  From the difficulty of child labor, to
facing death, to the enduring struggle to discern good from evil, its
imagery does not lose its potency by marrying it with science; nay, it
is enriched.  The Fall captures the transcendent issues of morality
and mortality.  It is a part of humanity's heritage.  It was crafted
by many hands during humanity's cultural evolution.  It grew up with
us, and we are challenged to allow it to grow further still.  Genesis
has the capacity to grow as this essay has shown.  Many of the seminal
events in Genesis have an interpretation that unites the poetry of our
past with the science of our present.  In Genesis humans claimed the
Tree of Knowledge, and the creation of ideas, or memetic engineering,
has been our domain while the Tree of Life and its secrets have
remained out of reach.  The creation of new life, genetic engineering,
is emerging however.  It will doubtlessly change the way we live and
die.  We may be on the brink of entering an age where we move beyond
the flaming sword and claim the Tree of Life for ourselves.

* * * 

# Works Cited

Blackmore, Susan.  <u>The Meme Machine.</u> Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999.

Hooper, Joseph.  "The Prophet of Immortality: Controversial theorist Aubrey de Grey insists that we are within reach of an engineered cure for aging.  Are you prepared to live forever?"  Popular Science Jan. 2005. Examined 1 July 2008 [http://www.popsci.com/scitech/article/2005-01/prophet-immortality](http://www.popsci.com/scitech/article/2005-01/prophet-immortality)

<p><u>The Holy Bible: King James Version.</u>  Iowa Falls, IA: World Bible Publishers, 2001.</p>

Wright, Robert.  <u>The Moral Animal: Why We Are, the Way We Are: The New Science of Evolutionary Psychology.</u>  New York: Vintage Books, 1994.


